---
title: Navigating family
date: 2025-02-20
draft: true
---
I grew up in India in a lower middle class family. I have a very good bond with
my parents, especially my mother. She has given all her life to this family,
and I've felt unconditional love throughout my life from her.

I moved to Europe when I was 25. I met my Dutch wife in the Netherlands, and we
now live in Switzerland with our baby daughter. I have a strong bond with my
wife, which only became stronger as the two of us navigated the complex
post-partum months without any help from either of our families. This is not
uncommon for expat couples who decide to not give birth in either of their home
countries.

The relationship between my wife and my parents is the main topic of this post.
Long story short, it isn't great today, and it isn't fun for anybody. But since
I can most accurately describe my own feelings, that's what I'll do.

### Language barrier

This is the biggest issue. My wife and I speak in English with each other. My
dad can speak _some_ English, my mom can't speak _any_ English, and I grew up
speaking Marathi with them. My wife does not speak Marathi or Hindi.

On top of this, there are differing cultural norms around communication. Indian
middle-class norms do not emphasize giving space or not interrupting when one
is speaking. The way my wife grew up, it is very rude to cut and "steal" a
person who is speaking with another person.

If either my mom picked up some English, OR my wife some Marathi, things would
be better. But here's what typically happens when my mom, my wife and I are in
the same room:

#### The cut-through

- Wife and I are talking in English.
- Mom doesn't "get" that there's an active conversation, and cuts through with a random question, or just a recollection of a funny childhood memory. This is directed to me, in Marathi.
- I cannot just ignore (physically, even if I try hard to), and this interrupts whatever my wife and I were talking about.

The impact:

- Wife feels insulted as she is interrupted by something she is not part of due
  to the language. I suspect that if my mom knew some English, such
  interruptions would be fewer.

- My brain energy meter drops a few good points as I feel a painful context
  switch, a pang of anxiety around anticipating an angry wife, to mitigate
  which I tend to rapidly translate what mom said to English.


#### The sideline

All of us are having lunch or dinner or whatever at a table. Mom starts talking
in Marathi to me. Mom is super talkative, does not give a fuck about giving
others the conversational space. I sometimes get carried away in the
conversation. Wife doesn't interrupt (even if I previously explicitly
encouraged her to), because that's just not her way of living, but also because
it is annoying to have to interrupt just to be included.

### Evil?

I might be biased due to my attachment to my mom, but honestly, all this is
unfortunate. My mom likes my wife. She cannot express it to her, but she does
to me, and she does in her actions. For example, she'll praise my wife's
curious talents, cook food that she likes, etc.

But we cannot blame my wife for not getting this because she... _never gets to
hear it_ in a way she can understand.

My wife really tried to forge a bond. She is great friends with my dad, but has
started to resent my mom's relationship with her.

Identifying that the language mismatch is the biggest issue here, I'd signed my
mom up to take English lessons a couple years ago. She dropped out, did not
really show motivation to learn the language.

### Where we at

At this point, my wife has decided to step back, and stop making effort to
create a bond. She does not see the effort reciprocated, and the unilateral
efforts have not gone anywhere over the years. I respect this. This is probably
the right thing to do for her to protect herself emotionally. She's also
decided to create boundaries -- if she's being sidelined on the dinner table,
she's going to walk away announcing that the reason. Again I get it.

My situation in all this is a bit complicated. I've been clear with my wife
that while I respect her predicament and decisions, I also have a bond with my
mom that I wish to keep. She understands.

However now I've also noticed a general resentment _towards_ my mom.




